and if there is one thing that I think
is responsible for the most change in
meditation that I've seen it is the
development of a one pointed mind and so
the practice of meditation is about
developing one pointed mind so let's
just think a little bit about this so
here's an analogy for you guys okay
so let's say I have a light bulb so if I
have a light bulb then the light is like
shines out in all directions right so
that's just kind of what light does is
like you're sending rays in all these
different directions and that's pretty
cool but like a light bulb doesn't do
much besides provide sight right it
provides light and that's what a light
bulb is for if you get really close to a
light bulb you can start to feel heat
but it doesn't actually affect any
change in the world that just offers
some illumination so a light bulb is a
case of a source of light that is
dissipated in all directions
compare that to a laser beam so a laser
beam is a source of light or multiple
sources of light that are concentrated
through a focus and like just think
about what a laser beam can do a laser
beam can like literally cut through
things and if you think about sort of
the energy from a light bulb in the
energy from the laser beam those are
relatively I mean in theory they can be
somewhat similar but the difference
between a light bulb 'ln and laser beam
is that one has like a focused kind of
like a concentration of energy in focus
and the other one is dissipated so when
I teach people to meditate one of the
main goals that I have is to is to help
them create a concentrated mind and then
once you concentrate all of your mental
energy and you train yourself to keep it
in one area and focus it a lot of
wonderful things start to happen so the
features of a concentrated mind are
their three that we're gonna talk about
one is that it focuses so this is kind
of the ability to follow through which
we'll talk a lot about it and and this
is I think the main reason that I wanted
to talk about this today the second is
that it creates a relaxed mind in the
third is that it creates an it like an
insatiable so a concentrated mind leads
to kind of follow through leads to
relaxation and leads to enjoyment so
we're gonna talk about the first one
which is focus
so a strong mind is one that is focused
and a weak mind is one that is
dissipated so it's it's spreading his
energy in lots of different areas and if
I had to kind of go through what I think
the central problem of a lot of people
that I work with today it's that they
have a weak mind and what I mean by a
weak mind is that their mind has
dissipated it's going in this direction
it's going in that direction it's going
over here it's going over there and that
if you think about people who tend to be
accomplished in life their mind is
strong and what we think about is strong
what the way I'm defining why they're a
strong mind is one that is capable of
focus so this is also like the point
that I need to kind of make a segue with
which is that a lot of people think that
they're lazy and I get where you're
coming from like you think you're lazy
but if we really tunnel down and this is
a lot of what we're gonna do today is
we're gonna tunnel down and define in
our mind what these broad terms me so if
you think about someone who is lazy
there's someone who thinks about doing
something but doesn't actually do it
because then they start thinking about
other things like I need to clean my
room but then you're like I don't feel
like cleaning my room let me watch TV
you turn on the TV and then you're
occupied by the TV that is laziness
right but like that's laziness is like a
behavior but if we think about what's
going on in the mind it is literally a
mind that is fluctuate a mind that is
dissipated a mind that is going in
different places so laziness is a weak
mind and a weak mind it is a dissipated
mind and a strong mind is one that is
focused that once you focus your mind
and you point it in a particular
direction that's the direction that it
goes through to and this is the problem
of follow-through right so a lot of
people have difficulty with
follow-through it's like one of the most
basic problems and so if we think about
fundamentally how do we how do we fix
follow-through it is to develop a
concentrated mind a mind that is capable
of thinking about the same thing for a
long period of time and this is what I
think is awesome about meditation
because meditation is teaching youth
Hana which is literally practicing the
concentration of your mind on a single
point without wavering and if you can
attain that skill then you will no
longer be lazy
and when I say no longer be lazy what I
mean is be lazy in the way that I'm lazy
so I'm still a lazy [ __ ] you guys saw
like the dough Don on my screen and
stuff like that so like like I still am
lazy I don't like to work I don't enjoy
working but the difference between me
and a lot of other people they think
that oh I'm like super hard-working I
have a lot of willpower I'm super smart
I'm way smarter than I am but once again
I've maintained from the very beginning
I'm really not that much smarter than
anyone or may not be smarter than the
average person who's watching the stream
the difference between me and all of you
guys and I'm making assumptions there is
that I have trained my mind to
concentrate on one point
that's it it's not an issue of laziness
it's not an issue of intelligence it is
an issue of I have spent the time and
trained my mind to concentrate on one
thing that's it so let's go back to
follow-through so follow-through is due
to scattering of mind okay so like let's
just think about this one day I resolved
to do something right so I say like okay
tomorrow I'm gonna stop playing video
games or tomorrow I'm gonna like wake up
and I'm gonna work out every day and if
you think about it like if you study
your mind in that moment the resolve of
your mind is actually like through the
roof the power of your mind is actually
really high it's not that you're like
half-assing your desire or your your
your desire to commit to something
you're committed in that moment your
commitment is real it's authentic and
you're like you're really hardcore
you're not deluding yourself you're not
faking it you're not pretending the
power of your mind in that moment is
actually really strong so why don't
people follow through so you're like
yeah tomorrow tomorrow I'm gonna do it
I'm gonna go to the gym and you resolve
to yourself if you think about it the
power of the mind in that moment is
actually strong the next day we say that
your resolve wavers so what does that
truly mean what goes on in the mind does
it mean that the strength of your mind
is different so you may think so you may
think like oh I had all that passion and
that that energy then and today I don't
but if I would argue that the strength
of your mind is still the same the
analytical capability of mind is still
the same
it's actually the focus that has been
lost that a resolution of mind is a high
degree of focus on one area and then you
were focused and I was looking over
there okay Jim Jim Jim Jim Jim and then
the next day video games
Netflix going to the grocery store
hanging out with my friends going to the
dog Oh Jim I feel like hanging out with
my dog I got to take my dog for the walk
I got a shower I got a clean I gotta do
this I gotta do that I got to play some
dota I got to watch some Netflix so it's
not actually strength of the mind it's
not analytical capability it's not
intelligence it's not laziness it is
concentration is it it is a fluctuation
and your ability to focus so your mind
resolves in one direction and then it
resolves in the complete opposite like
oh yeah I'm gonna go to the gym tomorrow
you wake up the next day I'm gonna play
some dota like just think about how
resolved your mind is you think about
that as a loss of resolution it isn't a
loss of resolution you are super
resolved to going to the gym yesterday
and you are equally resolved to do
anything but go to the gym today this is
what procrastination is right you are
you are resolved to do anything but the
work that needs to be done so your mind
is still has the same degree of
resolution it just it's focus is lacking
the resolution fluctuates what you put
your mind to fluctuates over time so the
fundamental problem with follow 3 and
procrastination or all this [ __ ] is a
lack of concentration on one point in
the mind so your mind thinks in one way
and then thinks in the other way so it's
not about strength it's not about lake
laziness it's about focus so the goal of
meditation is to develop a practice
where you train your mind to focus on
one point and once it learns how to
focus on one point it's sort of like
teaching a dog like a trick right like
once you train a dog like once you train
it how to be potty trained then like it
knows like where do we use the bathroom
and at the beginning it's tough but once
it knows where to use the bathroom it
always goes there and it does the
bathroom where it's supposed to
and so the difference between me and a
lot of the people who think that I'm Way
smarter or way over Harvard and a
fivehead nd whatever is it's not that
I'm smarter it's not that I have greater
willpower
I'm still lazy it's just that I have
like levelled up my concentration skill
and by leveling up my concentration
skill what I'm able to do is I tell my
mind to do something and then it
actually like runs with that for a while
it doesn't run with it forever but it
runs with it longer than many other
people and I'd say that's the difference
between like where I was let's say at
the age of 21 and where I am today which
is like 15 16 years later which is that
ice I learned how to like concentrate my
mind and then I started like
concentrating it and I'd say like okay
I'm gonna do some research so I like sat
down and like I did research for a while
still played a lot of video games still
did a lot of procrastination but I
learned enough of the skill of
concentration to where my mind was
focused on one thing so the next quality
of the mind is that a mind is is relaxed
and is also like enjoyable so if we
think about people who describe a flow
state so there I get a lot of questions
about a flow state so a flow state is is
a state of mind where your mind is kind
of like concentrated on one thing and
people find the experience of a flow
state to be Pleasant right it's like fun
to be in a flow State it's fun to sort
of be lost in like a certain kind of
work like if I'm sitting down and I'm
painting I don't paint but I've talked
to people who have painted and they sort
of enter this meditative state where
they really enjoy it they're absorbed in
the painting they're doing exactly what
they want to do it's kind of fun it's
relaxing and it's concentrated so those
three things go together right focus of
the mind relaxation and to find
something enjoyable and so now let's
think about this for a second so like -
like what does that mean if you say that
a concentrated mind is enjoyable but
aren't like external things enjoyable
like when we think about enjoyment we
don't think about a state of mind right
we think about an external thing so I
say like okay I enjoy a movie or I enjoy
a particular food or I enjoy spending
time with someone so like we think about
enjoyment is coming from external things
we don't try to understand enjoyment in
terms of ourself so let's do that for a
second let's try to see if we can
understand the nature of enjoyment and
how enjoyment relates to
my mind so it is my belief or my
experience that enjoyment has to do with
concentration of the mind and if we
think about enjoyable experiences if we
actually study our mind while we are
enjoying something we will see that our
mind is concentrated so if I go to the
movies and like the movie is engaging
then my mind is fully focused on the
movie I mean then my mind is fully
focused on the movie right and that
means I'm enjoying the movie the
definition of a movie that's enjoyable
is one that fully concentrates your mind
and so let's think about what can cause
a movie to not be enjoyable let's say
someone rings of their cell phone rings
and they start talking in the theater
what does that do to your enjoyment it
shatters your enjoyment what does that
do to the concentration of your mind the
reason that that makes your your mind
not have fun is because your
concentration moves from the movie to
the the person who's talking on the cell
phone so we can see that as the
concentration of your mind wavers our
enjoyment drops and if we think about
something like a boring movie so what is
a movie that we call boring it's a movie
that doesn't capture our attention and
concentrate our mind on the movie our
mind starts to wander that's what
happens when you're bored your mind
starts to wander and boredom is the
opposite of enjoyment therefore we can
see that like enjoyment involves
concentration of the mind and boredom
involves a wandering mind and therefore
is like a wandering mind is going to be
an unenjoyable mind right it's kind of
like simple if you just stop and you
look at the nature of enjoyment you'll
see that enjoyment involves
concentration of the mind and if you can
shatter or change the concentration of
the mind that experiences is going to be
less enjoyable okay I'm talking in
sweeping generalizations and I'm sort of
doing that for educational purposes or
instructive purposes so you can also
think about other things like let's say
you get a massage so like when you get a
massage if the massage is like really
good your mind is concentrating on the
massage you're like feeling let's say
they're like they're massaging your neck
or your shoulders or something like that
and then like you're fully focused on
that and you're like man that feels
amazing or if you're eating food like if
you really really enjoy food if you eat
something that's delicious like take a
bite of something and it's just like so
delicious you're my
is concentrated on that point right like
that's kind of how it works
and then like imagine you're at a
massage like you're getting a massage
and then your cell phone rings and then
it sort of like breaks your immersion
and if it breaks your emotion the
concentration of your mind begins to
waver and is the concentration of your
mind begins to waver then you you start
to experience less enjoyment so along
with enjoyment I'm sort of tossing in
relaxed we're gonna kind of gloss over
that for now but the next point that I
kind of want to talk about is that a
concentrated mind is capable of greater
understanding it's not just analysis but
it's kind of like this issue of like a
light bulb or a laser beam where if I
concentrate my mind
the amount of understanding I'm able to
gain from a particular set of like
information is gonna be way greater so
I've talked about this a little bit on
stream before but if you think about the
process of studying right like if I
study like let's say I have a textbook
in the first page of the textbook I'm
reading it and I read it and I like
don't understand it so I read it again
and I read it again and I read it again
and the fifth time I read it I
understand everything on the page so
let's just think about how that works
from sort of like a like a science or
mathematics of the mind does that mean
that with each time I read the paper I
gain 20 percent of the information no
because there are other times where I
can read the page once and I understand
everything that the page says so why do
I sometimes have to read the page five
times and other times I have to read the
page once it's because of the nature of
the concentration of my mind if I'm
studying and someone is distracting me
then I have to read the page multiple
times the greater the distraction the
more I have to to read the page if I'm
fully focused then I have to read the
page fewer times so if we think about
things like let's say adderall or other
medications that artificially improve
your focus like caffeine these are
things that increase the concentration
of the mind increase our ability to
focus and improve the quality of
studying but at the end of the day the
key thing is it's not the adderall makes
you a better study err it's that anytime
your
is focused on one thing you're able to
understand more so this has nothing to
do with logic or analysis it just means
that we're sort of focusing our mind on
one thing and the more that you focus
your mind the the easier it is to
understand and that applies to more than
just studying as well so just another
way to think about it is like if I go to
the library and I'm studying but I'm
stressed out about something let's say
that I'm worried that you know like my
my one of my parents is sick and if we
think about how does worry affect our
ability to study so when we worry our
concentration from the piece of paper
waivers to other things right the
concentration of the mind dissipates the
mind becomes weaker and we're unable to
focus as we're unable to focus it
becomes more difficult to study so we
can see that at the end of the day it is
all about concentration of the mind so
I'll give you guys a couple of other
examples so when I work with people like
some cool stuff sometimes happens so I
teach people how to meditate and I think
one of the biggest things that's
responsible for their the changes in
their life is is meditating and people
are kind of like well why should I
meditate what does it do for me and so
it's hard for me to kind of describe
until now because I sort of sat down and
concentrated on this and then figured it
out and that's why we started stream
late but it all comes down to focusing
the mind so I had a patient who I had
taught to meditate and they wanted to
quit smoking and so they would come to
my office every week and we do this
technique called motivational
interviewing which is sort of an
evidence-based psychotherapy or
intervention that you can do that helps
people stop using substances that they
don't want to use and we did
motivational interviewing for awhile I'm
a pretty good therapist they were pretty
committed and they still sort of like
they would stop smoking for a while and
they would continue smoking after they
would like relapse and they'd start
smoking again they'd stop start stop
start so this is all a wavering mind
right so they as they continued to
meditate they ended up going hiking and
they were doing some mountain climbing
and one day their mind just sort of
focused on one point so they were like
like climbing a mountain and they
started like
huffing and puffing and they were like
oh wow
smoking is my breath and the more I
smoke the harder it is for me to breathe
and my breath is more important to me
than smoking is and they quit and
they've quit smoking it's just it just
happened like they had this moment of
realization where you know
intellectually let that makes perfect
sense logically that makes perfect sense
like it's not any like rocket science
that smoking and breath are related like
everyone knows that but it's not
information or logic that actually
causes people to change their behavior
it's understanding and in that moment I
think this is because she was meditating
among lots of other things so you can
argue about what happened there with her
but in my experience this is what I see
when I teach people to meditate is that
they have a degree of like focus and
concentration in their mind where they
sort of have this revelation and then
they have some kind of understanding and
once they have that understanding then
their behavior changes it's kind of like
really hard to describe but but that's
what I see time and time and time again
and this is what we call kind of the
light bulb going off in someone's mind
right they're like something clicks and
then they change and it's my belief that
clicking is facilitated through the
concentration of mind and that that
concentration of mind leads to greater
understanding because like your mind is
fully focused you're kind of fully zoned
into that and then you're able to
understand things in kind of a different
way and the cool thing about this is
that when I teach people to meditate
it's not just like one part of their
life gets better so when I work with
people usually what happens is like a
lot of different dimensions of their
life gets better they get happier in
their job sometimes they change jobs
they get their like their marriages
improve they start to feel like better
about themselves their confidence
improves they start to take better
physical care of themselves it's kind of
bizarre like they're like every
dimension of their life starts to change
and I don't think it's because I'm a
miracle worker I mean I think in general
there's this saying in psychiatry that
all boats rise together so there's a
water level and like if you have you
know arthritis and depression if your
arthritis gets better than your
depression gets better if your
depression gets better there's your
try to skits - there's a lot of evidence
that suggests that this is just common
within humans but in my experience I've
seen the application of meditation work
in each of their dimension of their life
because once you concentrate your mind
and you understand the thinking of your
mind better you understand that things
around you better you understand work
dynamics better you work understand
relationship dynamics better you
understand yourself better so
concentration of the mind sort of helps
your mind be fully focused on analyzing
all these problems and so it sort of
makes sense that all of them are going
to improve because if you improve if you
level up the instrument through which
you're like acting in all of these
dimensions in your life and then all of
those dimensions are going to get better
right it's not anything magical it's
sort of like if I'm playing an RPG and I
have a sword and like I get a better
sword like my DPS against all kinds of
monsters is going to go up that's just
how the mind works so meditation is
about developing concentration of the
mind and the first way to develop
concentration of the mind is the Hana
pattern means a focusing practice and
we're gonna get to that okay I'm gonna
take a break for a second because I got
a drink with some water and then also I
want to just check in because I can't
see chat okay okay I'm gonna just check
in with you guys so like how is this for
y'all is this good like is that you guys
with me okay it's like this is like a
summary from like start to finish to
understand these different things okay
so I'm gonna talk for a few more minutes
and we're gonna get to questions okay
all right so now we're gonna talk about
gaming okay so let's just think about
like what effect does gaming okay I'm
gonna interact a little bit with chat on
this one okay what an effect isn't
gaming have on the mind what is gaming
do to your mind
okay so I'm seeing a lot of different
stuff right great so some people are
saying focus some people are saying
distraction so when you are playing a
game is your mind thinking about a lot
of things or thinking about one thing
that is focused right so we're not
talking about and good someone said this
depends that is focused that's what I'm
not talking about like so like
distraction and psychology
and dopamine and neuroscience we're not
talking about any of that right now
we're just talking about understanding
literally what is happening in your mind
in a moment is it focused or is it
wavering and people are saying it
depends right people are saying escape
so let's just think about that the
reason it is an escape is because your
mind doesn't want to think about this
and when I play a game I get lost in the
game I get focused in the game so this
is important video games create an
artificial set or non or artificial mr.
they they concentrate your mind on the
game and this and remember what is a
concentrated mind do it makes a
concentrated mind is enjoyable and
relaxed right so your mind really really
enjoys gaming because gaming is an
artificial sort of induction of like
Adana it's almost like a tyrant like it
focuses your mind and then you can
forget about everything else and that
feels really good because it feels good
to have a concentrated mind now let's
think through a couple of examples in
gaming where your mind wavers in its
concentration and let's see what impact
it has on like the enjoyment so let's
say that I'm playing the game like let's
say I'm playing a game of overwatch and
I'm just focusing on like I'm playing
reinhardt and like I'm focusing on like
like like you know just blocking
people's like I'm focusing on you know
shielding whatever thing is moving
actually let's forget about it watch
because again my mind is not able to
come up with the analogy as well enough
okay so let's let's talk about data so
if I'm playing a game of dota let's say
yeah cuz I just can't I can't compute
the analogies so if I'm playing a game
of dota like I'm focused on winning my
lane right and I'm like super super
focused on winning in my lane I'm having
fun and then someone like tee pees down
to my lane and feeds and then what does
my mind do right so like if I start
thinking if I stop thinking about the
game and start thinking about what
someone else is doing in the game then I
start to rage or tilt right that's true
of all games so forget about which one
but let's just think about at that point
what is my mind actually thinking about
it's not thinking about the game it's
thinking about this other person and the
more that I think about my teammates
what does that do to my enjoyment of the
game it drops like a [ __ ] lodestone
the more that I just played the game if
I'm playing the game I'm like let's see
what we can do like like if I'm focused
on the game I'm just playing the game
but if I start thinking about my
teammates then my enjoyment of the game
stopped goes down right and I can kind
of like fluctuate like my mind is like
oh this guy's are [ __ ] this guy's an
idiot like this guy's doing this this
guy's doing that and then my enjoyment
of the game goes down and then when I
start thinking about like if I just play
the game like so I know you guys have
done this because everyone has done this
right where you play the game and then
you have someone on your team who's bad
but you don't really think about that
you're like okay this guy's gonna show
up and he's gonna die
but like I'm gonna still like I'm just
gonna play the game and we can still win
and the more that you focus on the game
and like they're people that die and
whether you're playing overwatch or dota
they're their noobs that are dying like
all the time
in any game they're gonna be noobs that
are dying so why is it that one game you
rage in one game you don't it's because
in one game your concentration or your
focus remains on the game and on the
other one your your concentration
dissipates and it starts to think about
other people so as long as you focus
your attention on one thing and just
play the game then your performance
improves your enjoyment improves
and it's just an overall better
experience and people know that right so
like when you mute your allies what is
that doing for your mind
it is literally helping your mind retain
focus on the game and if you mute your
allies you are gonna have a better game
and like so this is what I'm trying to
tell you guys is that the mind works in
this way like if I'm let's say like I'm
having a great meal that I really enjoy
like let's say I go to a sports bar and
I'm having some wings and I'm watching
like UT football and then like someone
comes in and starts playing the bagpipes
like that's not gonna be a fun
experience for if I can mute the bad
bagpipes I'm gonna like go back to like
enjoying the game but the more that your
mind is focused not only do you perform
better you understand things better it's
more enjoyable it's more relaxed right
like that's how the mind works
so gaming creates an artificial sense of
focus it's not artificial I mean it
creates a focus mind that's why it's fun
what I mean by artificial is it doesn't
it doesn't it's not because our training
our mind to do that it automatically
does that for us and generally speaking
when we talk about things being
enjoyable those are things that
artificially cause our mind to focus on
something so even delicious food versus
like less delicious food the delicious
food is gonna cause our mind to be
focused on it's like wow like that
flavor oh my god there's like Meyer
lemon in there and a hint of pepper and
you can really taste that that rendered
bacon fat like it's crisp it's delicious
it's fresh it's got a hint of heat like
you know that's enjoyment it's
understanding enjoyment relaxation they
all come together thank you guys for the
sub subs okay so let
just that's that's my schpeel okay so
I'm gonna summarize so at the end of the
day the first thing that we're gonna
learn is Dharma pattern a is the
Sanskrit word for focus it spelled eh-eh
are a na da Derna okay
what is dodged I don't know what that
means